2 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
National University
5
th Edtion July 2024 - June 2028
Please see section on “Copyrights and Acknowledgement”. Apart From what has been
stated in that section, no part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted
in any form or any means without permission from the President of the National
University.
Copy Right
National Library Cataloging - Sudan
38. 190624 National University N.p
Prospectus National University/National University 3rd ed. - Khartoum:
National University : 2015-06-05
95 p.: ill: 30 cm
ISBN: 978-99942-841-1-8
1 National University-Sudan - Directory.
A. Title
B. Qurashi M. Ali (E.D)
Disclaimer:
Neither the National University, nor any of its administrators or staff, shall be liable
to and person or entity with respect to any loss or damage, or alleged to be caused,
by the information contained or omitted form this publication
This is the 5th Edition of the PROSPECTUS of the National University-Sudan (NUSU). In this document registered students will nd information about the mission, vision and values of NUSU, and
all programme details and activities. This edition includes both UNDERGRADUATE and GRADUATE course outlines. NUSU aims at high-class education in medical, technological and social sciences. This is reected in this comprehensive outline. It describes the basis of NUSU’s educational
philosophies, programme objectives including the characteristics of the graduate, strategies and
methods, degree structure, semester duration and credit hour load, and brief outline of content.
This represent a narrow window into the complex organization of NUSU. More information on
the rationale of modules, behavioural objectives, and assessment can be found in the curriculum
of each Faculty. The calendars, year plans and timetables are issued for each semester with the
exact dates for teaching sessions, other learning opportunities, assessment, feedback, and holidays.
NUSU is now 19 years old. It is still developing, and trying to set traditions of availing all activities
in its publications, that may remain relevant for 3-4 years, before new editions are issued. The
councils and committees of NUSU, while compiling this, are drawing their experience from lo5
Welcome
Note from The President of NUSU
[www.nu.edu.sd]
4 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
cal and worldwide, up-to-date educational practices. Concurrently, other documents (Student
Manual, Sta Handbook, Induction packages, and policies and procedures) are re-written and
updated, in view of the emerging concerns about student welfare, environment, students with
special needs, and virtual online educational resources.
There is a strong focus on synergy between modern education, developmental needs, and employment market requirements. This has laid down a wide area of maneuvers in the choice of
specic disciplines and modules. In each discipline, a detailed career advice has been added in
this edition to show students the opportunities available if they choose to be employed or opt
to start their own business to employ others.
The reputability of NUSU has attracted students from about 25 countries and all continents.
This representation requires quality of premises and services, as well as understanding of diversity, inclusiveness, and considerations for non-discrimination in the educational activities and
campus life. International students and the Sudanese students whose families are living outside Sudan, receive special induction, supervision, and directives by the Deanship of Student
Aairs, and regular courses shown in this prospectus as Sudanese Studies.
It is my pleasure to invite all qualied students to join NUSU’s exciting new and innovative educational programmes. Students, parents, and sponsors are welcome to visit the campus. They will receive
guidance from the HELP DESK at the Main Gate. They will be escorted to buildings and connected
with the leadership of the university or faculties. Our primary target is to create guest satisfaction.
Your comments and feedback are important for us to continue improvement to meet our goals.
Last, but not least, we would like to invite our higher education colleagues, inside and outside
the Sudan, to read this publication. Our special request: please have a critical look at this and
show us our faults. You may suggest means of correcting them, and tell others about the positive and bright spots of this attempt. Your advice will be highly appreciated.
Prof. Qurashi M. Ali PhD, MD, FRCPE
President, Na琀椀onal University, Sudan
www.nu.edu.sd
7
ACKNOWLEGEMENTS
Worldwide, the overall innovations and their modications stem from the eorts of Professor
Bashir Hamad. Every page of our documents could not be nalized, or brought to fruition,
without his fatherly approval and comments or traces of his educational spirit. His direct and
indirect contributions to the curriculum of this University and continuous encouragement are
gratefully acknowledged, particularly those related to educational strategies, instruction, and
evaluation. The following have reviewed and reorganized the nal versions of this prospectus:
Prof. A/Rahman Eltom MD,PhD, Prof. A Rahman Biri MD FRCP, Prof. Elthami Abdul Mageed PhD,
(medicine), Hassan M. Ali PhD, Dr. Ahmed Abusham PhD and Dr. Salah Ibrahim PhD, and Dr.
Fatma Mukhtar MSc. (pharmacy), Dr. Kamal Khalil MD.Dr. Elfatih A Mageed MD (physiotherapy),
Dr. M. A. Siddiq PhD. Prof. Awad Haj Ali PhD. (computer and health informatics program), Prof.
Ibrahim Ghandor and Dr. Abdalla Darous, Dr. Enas Badawi PhD, Dr. Arif Aan (dentistry), Prof.
Sayda H. Elsa MD, PhD and Dr. Nihal Mirza MD, Dr. M. Sirelkhatim, Dr. M. Abdelgadir, Dr. Maha
Magoub (medical laboratory sciences), Dr.Abdel Moneim Saeed PhD, Dr. M. A. Elsheikh PhD
Dr. Elsir Ali Saeed PhD, Dr. M. Elfadil PhD, Prof.Maha Esmeal (imaging technology), Prof. Awatif
Ahmed PhD, and Ms. Fatma Bhruddin MSc, Dr. Sumia Ibrahim PhD (nursing and midwifery),
Prof. Salih Faghiri PhD, Prof. Omer Elmagli PhD, and Prof. Hassan Kamal PhD, Dr. M. A. Osman,
Dr. Mutaz Suliman, Dr. A Azim Almahal PhD, and Prof. A Gadir M. Ahmed PhD (management
sciences). The contributions of Dr. Nadir Hasanain {Engineering) , Prof. A Latif Elboni and Dr.
Ibrahim Mirghani (International Relations) are outstanding.The list, of those who, knowingly
or unknowingly, contributed curricular details or ideas registered in Editor’s memory or documents, is exhaustive. Our thanks are to the following professors: A/Hameed Lut, M.Y. Sukkar,
Elbagir Ali El Faki, Amir El Mubarak, Omar Abdul Aziz, Othman Taha, Othman Khalafalla, Ali
Habbour, Omar A. Mirghani, Awadelseed Mustafa, Mubarak Majzoub, M. Awadalla Salih, Haz El
Shazali, Jaafar M. Malik, Othman Hamour, Ali Karar, A/Alla A/Wahid, El Tayeb Abdul Rahman, Eisa
Othman El Amin, Mamoun Homeida, Hassan M. Ahmed, Ali Abdul Rahman Barri, Ibrahim M. A/
Rahim, Ahmed A. Muhammadani, Mukhtar El-Khatim, A/Rahman A/Hafeez, Sayed M. Ahmed,
Awad A/Rahman El-Awad, M. Elamin El-Sharif, Kamal Zaki, A/Rahman El-Tom, Ghazi Salahuddin, Bakri Osman Saeed, Mohyddin Majzoub, Jamal Suleiman, Abbas ElKarib, ElGamri ElRadi,
Salah M. Omer, Majid Mustafa, Muzamil Hassan A/Qadir, M. A/Rahim A/AAl, Khalid Musa, Bakri
Musa Abdul Karim, Tahir Othman Ali, Omar Siddiq, Fathel Rahman Ahmed Ali, A.Moneim Sahal,
Omar Habbal, Mickell Seedt, Ara Tekian, Margaret Uguroglu, Saleh A. Al Damegh, Zeinel Ab-
6 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
deen Karar, A/Rahman Eltom, Ahmed Fahal, Kamal Qurashi, Ammar Khamis, Elamin I. Eneima,
Elsheikh A Elobeid, Sara M. Husein, Abubakr Suliman, Elfatih A/Majeed, Mabyua Mustafa, Mustafa Idris, Amin O Sidahmed, Ammar Eltahir, Mr. Suleiman M. Dafa’Alla, Salah Faraj, and many
more, we will add them as soon as we are reminded. There is no intention of omission of any
eort or opinion.
Most of the “Dentistry Curriculum” has been adapted, with permission, from experts all over the
world, mainly deans and heads of departments in the Sudanese dental colleges, and institution in dental sciences. The outstanding eort of professors Ibrahim Ghandour, Yahya Eltayeb,
Ibrahim Elkamil, Osman Elgindi, Ahmed Suliman, Abbas Ghariballa, Nadia A. Yahia, Elnur Ibrahim and the improvements made by Enas Badawi, Eman Khair, and Suha A/Gadir is gratefully
acknowledged.
The Engineering curriculum has been designed by committees headed by Dr. Nadir Hasanain
as dean and head of civil department, and valuable contributions by Prof. Seifeldin Sadig. The
International Relations and diplomatic studies curriculum has been written rst by Dr. Ibrahim
Mirghani and has been edited and adapted to the national requirements by Prof. A Latif Albouni and Bakri A/Karim.
The whole idea could not have seen the light without the encouragement of the Investors’ Corporation and Board of Trustees of the National University, who spend days every week responding
to routine and emerging issues of nancing. On their behalf, I would like to thank the genius and
friendly contribution of Mr. Zahir Twahry for his artistic preparation of the 3rd and 4th editions and
other NUSU publications. The nal editing of most of the undergraduate manuscripts has been
skillfully and patiently carried out by Prof. A Rahman Osman Beeri Former Secretary of Academic
Aairs. The graduate prospectus has been compiled by Prof. M. M. A. Abulnur, Dean of Graduate
Studies and Scientic Research, and Dr. M. Abd Al Kader and Dr. Hatem Al Rufaai.
9
 WHAT IS THE NATIONAL
UNIVERSITY?
1. MISSION, VISION AND VALUES
The VISION of the National University is to be a world-class leading provider of private higher
education in the Sudan, in the aspects of elegance of environment and structures, excellence
of curricula and learning strategies, quality of management systems, commitment of investors and employees to customer satisfaction (students, relatives, and regulators), distinguished
graduates in academic achievements, general ethical standards, and concern with professionalism and original research production.
The MISSION is to: (1) constantly strive to provide ecient and best-in-class professionals, in
their specialties, (2) meet and exceed our customer needs and expectations, and (3) stay ahead
of the competition by creating safe and rewarding workplace facilities and innovating new
quality output, services, and relationships in transparent, honest, and fair business.
The VALUES are : (1) obligations to treat the public and one another with personal and professional
integrity, consideration, and mutual respect, (2) commitment to honesty, truthfulness, respect for
human dignity, and professional ethical behaviour, (3) fair treatment of all citizens and employees,
with no discrimination on the basis of morphology or ideology (4) promotion of democratic values,
hard work, perseverance, commitment to success, accepting responsibility and accountability for
one’s conduct and obligations, and (5) creating and maintaining a respected reputation and positive
image in the community as a trusted partner through excellent care of the individual and family, and
responsibility towards the community and environmental problems and concerns.
2. DOCUMENTS
The legal documents of the University include: (1) the University Charter, (2) Academic Regulations
(3) Rules of Activity and Conduct (4) Study Fees’ Regulations, (5) Employment Regulations, (6) National Employment Penalty Regulations, (7) Contracts and Salary Scale, (8) Job Descriptions, (9) Sta
Handbook, (10) Students’ Manual, (11) Quality Manual, (12) Teaching, Learning and Assessment
Policy, (13) Prospectus and Curricula, (14) Organizational Chart, (15) Committee Structure, (16) Logbooks of students’ skills and activities, (17) Year Plans, (18) Academic Calendars, (19) Programme
Evaluation Forms, (20) Portfolio of Architectural and Structural Designs of Buildings, (21) External
Examiners’ Appointment, Reporting and Response documents and (22) numerous policies and procedures in areas of quality, safety, and non-discrimination.
8 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
3. BOARD OF TRUSTEES
The Board of Trustees (BOT) is formed according to the Charter to include the investors, the academicians, the representative of the Ministry of Higher Education, and public gures of interest in education or eminent individuals involved in social accountability issues of universities. The current
BOT is chaired by Dr. Taha Eltayeb A. Elimam, and includes in its membership: Prof. Qurashi M. Ali,
Dr. Amin O. Sidahmed, Dr. M. Sirelkatim Ali, Prof. A-Rahman Osman Beeri, Prof. Osama A-rahman
Elamin, Eng. M. Awadelkarim Elgasim, Dr. Saad Subahi, Dr. Elhadi Bakheet, Eng. Yousif A. Yousif, Prof.
A-Moneim Algousi, Dr. Ismail Qurashi, Prof. Hassan M. Ali, Deans of faculties, and representatives
appointed by the Ministry of Higher Education and approved by the President of the Sudan.
4. RIGHTS
4.1 GENDER RIGHTS
Throughout this manual (and the webpage) every eort has been made to use he/she, his/
her, him/her. It may not be possible to assure that this fair use has been consistent. Any such
unintended mistake should be taken to mean both sexes. Females have been addressed in situations of special concerns, in gender-specic issues, mainly out of respect for their specialized
roles.
4.2 EXCLUSION OF LIABILITY AND DISCLAIMER
Throughout this manual (and the webpage) every eort has been made to ensure that expert,
accurate, and up-to-date guidance has been included. The administrative and academic authority continuously updates the NUSU data and academic regulations to satisfy the emerging needs, more quickly than publications would reect. Approved changes are shown at the
ocial noticeboards of the University. Accordingly, neither the Ministry of Higher Education,
nor the NUSU administration, shall be liable to any person or entity with respect to any loss
or damage caused or alleged to be caused by the information contained or omitted from this
manual (or the webpage).
4.3 COPYRIGHTS
a. The curriculum timetable and course details resemble many of those (or may contain parts)
in other colleges in which the “President of NUSU” has been the main or essential member in the bodies responsible for curriculum design and evaluation. In many institutions he
has been one of the driving forces for innovation. These institutions include: University of
Gezira (Sudan), Sultan Qaboos University (Oman), Omdurman Islamic University, Alzaeim
Al-Azhari University, University of Medical Science and Technology, African International
University, National Ribat University, Al-Razi University (Sudan), and Al Qassim University
(Saudi Arabia). Major innovations have been added to improve on the experience of the
above institutions. This manual (and the webpage), in addition to comprehensive compilations in each program document (to be given to each student) is an entity of its own. Therefore, the total set of details, which is not available in any other institution so far, may not be
copied or published without written permission from the National University- Sudan.
b. The teaching material available in the webpage, and other published material in the University
notes, is original and should not be reproduced for commercial use, in any form without written
permission of the National University- Sudan. Non-protable teaching purposes are allowed.
Our teachers and colleagues, who are mentioned in the “Acknowledgements”, are free to use
this material because it is all from them, we could not single out what is ours from theirs.
5. ENTRANCE REQUIREMENTS
A. Applications must be through the Ministry of Higher Education (Sudan) Admission Directorate, based on passing a fresh Sudan (or equivalent) School Certicate or equivalent qualication (please see relevant booklets provided at that oce). Older 5-10 years’ School Certicates
may be considered, if vacancies are there, and details are approved by the Admission Oce.
The newly introduced online application dismiss disqualied applicants automatically.
B. Direct applications are welcome, but will be entered online by the University to the Admission Directorate for approval.
C. International applications will be processed similarly, but candidates are advised to follow
the application procedure in the webpage, and wait for a response, before arriving in the
Sudan. The NUSU Administration takes 5 working days (after receipt of application) to nalize acceptance. Electronic communication is preferred. For security reasons. A student who
is granted acceptance by the NUSU will NOT be allowed by the Ministry of Internal Aairs to
transfer to any other university after arrival, except after studying and passing, at least, one
academic year..
D. Mature students qualied with a previous health science professional degree may be considered. In this case early application is recommended (6 months before national intake
in September every year), because of the time it may take for the approval of the School
Certicate by Ministries of General Education and Higher Education, Sudan.
E. Final decision on acceptance depends on the results of an interview to conrm if the student has the aptitude to join a specialty, and is free from physical and psychological inabilities that are not compatible with the responsibilities of a specic or hardship profession. But
individuals with special needs are welcome and will nd NUSU a conducive environment of
values against discrimination.
F. Transfer NUSU from other universities may be considered for enrollment in Semesters 2, 3,
4 or 5 only, based on the approval of the General Directorate of Admission in the Ministry of
Higher Education.
6. STAFF AND RECRUITMENT
Academic and administrative sta interested in joining the National University-Sudan, may show
their intention by lling the e-recruitment form included in the webpage. A response will be sent
10 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
by e-mail within 48 hours, and further instructions will follow. Appointment of academic sta is
based on academic excellence in the areas of research and teaching. Academic applicants with no
research records or grants will not be considered for full-time positions in this university. Full- and
part-time sta list may be looked up in Academic Sta section of the webpage.
Applicants interested in joining other private educational institutions in the Sudan can reach
them through our web-page. The employment conditions and salary scale are not (currently)
available in this manual or website.
7. LOCATION AND MAPS
A. The Country: The best advantage of this National University is that it is located in Sudan,
an Afro-Arab country with rich human and natural life resources. The inhabitants are either
Arabs or Africans.. The Sudan educational institutions are known, worldwide, for their academic excellence, ethical heritage and professional teaching perfection. A Sudanese national, wherever he/she may be is unique in considerateness, courtesy, and hospitality. In
almost 80% of the country, it is the safest in the world. A single lady can jog in Khartoum, or
any other city, in the middle of the night unbothered. Sudanese abide voluntarily by strong
moral codes and respect for females as foreigners. The media-nourished concepts of NorthSouth or West-East conicts have largely exaggerated the reality. The color of people has no
signicance in this country, maybe the only country in the world where color has never and
can never be a real cause of conict. Media are prototyping other countries’ dilemmas on
a local setup that has got some developmental problems. It is interesting that the Arabs in
this country are mainly non-white, and the non-Arabs are not necessarily black, contrary to
what the media have publicized. The luckiest person in the world, any moment, is the one
who has been received by a Sudanese host.
Prot Sudan Khartoum
B. The City: The capital is Khartoum, a city made up of three cities striding the White Nile, Blue
Nile as they join to form the River Nile. This has given it unique panoramic landscapes and
scenery. There are about 4-6 million inhabitants, mostly in traditional houses, known for
their spacious yards. Khartoum city is the ocial capital crowded with governmental oces, ministries, embassies and international organizations. There are some auent districts
where the price of a house may be as expensive as in New York or Tokyo, and other areas
of modest housing. Therefore students have a wide range of choice. Transportation used to
be a problem, now it is quite easy, but still, students are advised to nd accommodation as
near as possible to the University premises.
C. Premises and Environment : (See map). The National University permanent building is located
in the Eastern part of Khartoum called Al Raqi District, near the Khartoum-Medani Highway,
in an auent newly established residential area. This region has an interlacing and frequent
network of transport, yet the wide roads give no impression of crowdedness, or noise pollution. This accessibility is an invaluable asset for an educational institution. The University block,
a purpose-built structure, assumes a masterpiece of architectural innovation (see pictures). The
National University is open to students and sta for 18 hours on weekdays and 6 hours on weekends. The library, self-directed learning facilities are available for registered students and sta.
Limited access to research laboratories is allowed for certain students who are involved in sta’s
research projects. Certain sport facilities (Basket- ball and volleyball) are within the premises.
In-door recreational facilities are available in the Cafeteria. The source of pride for the University is the design of its beautiful, environmentally friendly, and durable facilities that support its
mission. Students and employees are expected to respect and work towards achieving that.
Directives from them to their visitors are very important to maintain and improve the level of
standards of perfection we intend to reach. There are few similar, or near, buildings of excellence
of space and quality, so far, in higher education institutions in the Sudan.
A 10-oor teaching hospital building stands next to the main University block and accommodates over 300 beds with full tertiary care facilities. A 5-oor building accommodate the
Faculty of Engineering. NUSU owns a 35000 M2 area in Albagair Suburban Area, in which a
new campus is being built. It includes a rural hospital.
8. PROGRAMME FEES
A list of tuition fees is published by the MHESR every year. Private institutions keep updating
such list, but a student accepted in one particular academic year will NOT be charged with
the fees published for fresh students. Fees cover teaching and administrative activities of the
University including laboratories and in-campus training. Accommodation and food subsidies
are NOT included. Transportation to and from the University or o-campus training sites is
NOT included, but the University tries to provide that for selected activities. Additional fees are
variable for compensations of absence or failure. Students pay for all courses Training outside
the campus and examinations [substitute or supplementary], scheduled in the Summer or Holidays, based on the credit hour load of the courses. Fees for such compensations are usually not
published in Academic Calendar, but requested by students or their sponsors.
12 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
COMPUTER SCIENCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 13
Background
The Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology at the National University of Sudan (NUSU-CS IT) strives to be a leading centre of excellence in education and research in the
eld of computer science and information technology at both the national and international
levels.
The college focuses on producing competent and innovative graduates in the eld of computer science and information technology through distinguished educational programmes supported by scientic research and innovation. The college is committed to advancing scientic
research in the eld of computer science and information technology, developing technology,
and contributing to the progress of society.
The college emphasises the importance of critical thinking, lifelong learning, and strong partnerships with academic and industrial institutions. The college upholds core values such as
integrity, innovation, and respect, and seeks to maintain its leading role in advancing information technology in society.
Since 2015, NUSU has been accredited by the British Accreditation Council (BAC). These accreditations have enhanced the institution’s international reputation and standing. To date,
three cohorts have graduated.
Our Vision
The Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology at the National University of Sudan (NUSU-CSIT) aims to establish itself as a premier centre of excellence in computer science
and information technology education and research, both nationally and internationally. Its
goal is to provide innovative, knowledge-based education and training in computer science
and information technology that encourages critical thinking, creativity, and cultivates skilled
and innovative IT professionals. The college is dedicated to promoting high-quality research
in computer science and information technology and forging lasting collaborations with comCOMPUTER SCIENCE DEPARTMENTA
14 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
munities, industry organisations, and academic partners to advance technology, innovation,
and sustainable development.
Our Mission
The College of Computer Science and Information Technology at the National University of
Sudan (NUSU-CSIT) is committed to fostering academic excellence, advancing scientic research in computer science and information technology, and promoting social responsibility
within a student-centered educational environment. The college seeks to develop competent
and innovative IT programmers dedicated to lifelong learning and knowledge-based practice.
Graduates are expected to be innovative, critical thinkers who can respond to the technological needs of diverse communities and are equipped to tackle local, regional, and global
technical challenges. In partnership with IT systems and the broader community, the college
aims to make meaningful contributions to improving and developing information technology
and promoting sustainable technological solutions.
Our Values
The core values of the College of Computer Science and Information Technology at the National University of Sudan (NUSU-CSIT) include:
•	 A commitment to addressing community technology challenges and providing
solutions with e昀昀ectiveness and responsibility.
•	 Upholding hone猀琀y, truthfulness, and respect for user data privacy and rights in all
actions.
•	 Ensuring fair treatment for all people and 猀琀a昀昀, without discrimination based on
ethnicity, appearance, religion, or ideology.
•	 Promoting democratic principles, hard work, perseverance, dedication to success,
and accepting responsibility and accountability for one’s conduct and obligations.
•	 Maintaining a reputable and positive community image as a tru猀琀ed partner by
providing innovative and secure technical solutions, while being prepared for
accountability
Our Objectives:
•	 To graduate practitioners holding a Bachelor’s degree in Computer Science and
Information Technology, who possess 猀琀rong technical skills and a communityoriented approach, along with ethical and professional commitments.
•	 To enhance scienti昀椀c research in the 昀椀eld of computer science and information
technology by leveraging the university’s facilities and communication capabilities.
•	 To contribute to community development by providing technical services through
its in猀琀itutions and collaborating organisations, thereby supporting overall societal
well-being.
COMPUTER SCIENCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 15
•	 To participate in the design and implementation of technical programmes and
projects by utilising the expertise of its speciali猀琀s and consultants.
•	 To promote continuous education by organising local and international courses,
workshops, and conferences aimed at improving the skills and e昀케ciency of IT
professionals.
•	 To ensure the availability of essential equipment and software to elevate the
quality of IT services, through partnerships with relevant government agencies
and organisations.
Departments
The faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology consists of two main departments:
Department of Computer Science
Focuses on studying the theoretical foundations and programming aspects of computer science.
Department of Information Technology
Focuses on studying computer applications, networks, and information systems.
These departments work together to provide comprehensive and integrated technical education, aiming to graduate specialists in computer science and information technology who are
capable of facing technical challenges in society.
Administration
Dr Mubark Alamin Almubark Dalil
Faculty Dean
Dr. Hiba omer ali
Deputy Dean
Mrs. Laila
Registrar
Computer Science Departmenta
16 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
Sta
Name Academic Rank E-Mail
Dr. AbdElrahman Mohammed Alamin Assistant Professor abdalrahman9546@gmail.com
Dr. Bakhita Mohamed Bashir Nasir Assistant Professor tonanasir2018@gmail.com
Dr. Mazen Rashad Assistant Professor —
Dr. Mohamed Ahmed Elmubarak
Mohamed Assistant Professor M.a.almobark@gmail.com
Dr. Mubarak Elamin Elmubarak Daleel Assistant Professor mubarakdaleel99@nu.edu.sd
Dr. Salaheldnn Deng Aljack Ashoul Assistant Professor aljacksalah3@gmail.com
Dr. Wafa Mohmmed Mustsfa Ahmed Assistant Professor Wa2009fa@gmail.com
Mr. Ahmed Abdelrahman Eltom Lecturer Ahmedeltom2282@gmail.com
Mr. Amin Talha Hassan Talha Lecturer —
Mr. Elemam Lecturer —
Ms. Entisar Hussein Gadal Fireen Lecturer sicrtaria2@gmail.com
Ms. Hajer AbdAlrhman Abdalhleem
Mohamed Lecturer —
Ms. Hiba Omer Ali Abdalla Lecturer Hibaomer31@gmail.com
Ms. Marwa Eltigani Abubaker Ali Lecturer marwategani@gmail.com
Mr. Mohamed Almojtaba Alamin Okasha Lecturer malmojtaba93@gmail.com
Mr. Abdalrahman Mohmmed Hassan Teaching Assistant abdelrahman.ibrahim3217@gmail.
com
Ms. Baraa Badraldeen Ali Teaching Assistant azhanhb1234@gamil.com
Ms. Hanadi Mohammed Ibrahim Teaching Assistant Hanohanadimohammed@gmail.
com
Ms. Remaz Abbas AbdAllah Teaching Assistant dr.remazabbas12@gmail.com
Ms. Safana AbdElati AbdElfarag AbdElrasool Teaching Assistant Savannax120@gmail.com
COMPUTER SCIENCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 17
First Year - Semester One
# Course Title Code Credit Hours
1 Computer Applications COM-111 3
2 Principles of Information Systems INF-112 3
3 English for Speci昀椀c Purpose I HMS113 3
4 Calculus I MAT114 3
5 Introduction to Computer Science COM115 3
6 Discrete Mathematics MAT116 3
7 Principles of Economic HMS117 3
21
First Year - Semester Two
# Course Title Code Credit Hours
1 File Management COM121 3
2 Introduction to Databases COM122 3
3 Computer Maintenance INF124 2
4 English for Speci昀椀c Purpose II HMS123 3
5 Principles of Accounting HMS125 3
6 Principles of Programming COM126 3
7 Algebra and Geometry MAT127 3
8 Calculus II MAT128 3
23
Computer Science Departmenta
18 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
Second Year-Semester Three
# Course Title Code Credit Hours
1 Digital Systems COM211 3
2 Programming Methods (1) COM212 3
3 Differential Equations MAT213 3
4 Multimedia INT214 3
5 Database Concepts COM215 3
6 Statistics & Probabilities (1) MAT216 3
7 System Analysis & Design (1) SYS217 3
8 Numeric Computation (1) MAT218 3
24
Second Year-Semester Four
# Course Title Code Credit Hours
1 Computer architecture and organization COM221 3
2 Human - Computer Interaction INT222 3
3 Statistics & Probabilities (2) SYS223 3
4 Database Programming COM224 3
5 Algorithms and Data Structure COM225 3
6 Numeric Computation (2) MAT226 3
7 Operational Research MAT227 3
8 Internet Technology INT228 3
24
Third Year- Semester Five
# Course Title Code Credit Hours
1 Programming Methods (2) (OOP) COM311 3
2 Computer Networks and Communications INT312 3
3 Database Applications SYS313 3
4 Software Engineering (1) SWE314 3
5 Visual Programming COM315 3
6 Algorithms Analysis and Design COM316 3
7 Compilers Design COM317 3
21
COMPUTER SCIENCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 19
Third Year- Semester Six
# Course Title Code Credit Hours
1 Software Engineering (2) SWE321 3
2 Operating Systems Concepts COM322 3
3 Open Source Software & Technologies INT323 3
4 Research Methodology HMS324 3
5 Computer Graphics and Visualization COM325 3
6 Data Mining COM326 3
7 E-commerce INT327 3
21
Fourth Year - Semester Seven
# Course Title Code Credit Hours
1 Information Security INT411 3
2 Parallel and Distributed Computing COM412 3
3 IT Project Management INT413 3
4 Arti昀椀cial Intelligence COM414 3
5 Simulation and Modeling COM415 3
6 Elective (1) COM416 3
18
Fourth Year - Semester Eight :
# Course Title Code Credit Hours
1 Mobile Device Programming Technologies INT421 3
2 Professional Ethics HMS422 2
3 Elective (2) HSC423 3
4 Elective (3) HSC424 3
5 Graduation Project COM425 6
17
Computer Science Departmenta
20 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
Course Outline
Detailed behavioral objectives, skills, assignments and problems are listed in each course
book. The lists are too extensive to be included below Courses in the curriculum timetable
not outlined below are included in other programmed, or in the original document with the
program coordinator.
Semester One
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Calculus -1 MAT114 1/Longitudinal 3(2,2,0)
This introductory calculus course covers dierentiation and integration of functions of one
variable, with applications. Topics include: Concepts of Function, Limits and Continuity, Dierentiation Rules, Application to Graphing, Rates, Approximations, and Extremum Problems, The
Fundamental Theorem of Calculus, Applications to dierentiation
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Introduction to computer science COM115 Longitudinal/1 (2,0,3)3
The course provides students with a broad foundation in computer science. Topics include:
introduction to digital technology, historical review; logic gates; binary, octal, and hexadecimal systems; computer architecture and basic components, internal and external interfaces,
types of removable media; introduction to operating systems; programming Paradigms, basic
programming concepts; concept of algorithm, representation, correctness and performance
of algorithms; introduction to objects. The course equips students with basic problem solving
skills and prepares them for taking the programming sequence subjects and other computer
science disciplines.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Discrete Mathematics MAT116 Longitudinal/1 (2,2,0)3
Propositional Logic, Predicate Logic and Quantication, Methods of Proof, Sets and Functions,
Arithmetic Algorithms, Growth of Functions, Computational Complexity of Algorithms, Integer properties and Matrices, Mathematical Induction, Recursion, Sequences and Summations,
Program Correctness, Graphs and its Applications, Trees and its Applications, Languages and
Grammars, Finite-State Machines, Automata and Language Recognition, Turing Machines
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Principles of Economics HMS117 Longitudinal/1 (3,0,0)3
The course topics: Language of Economics, Types of Economies and Economic Systems and
COMPUTER SCIENCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 21
Institutions, The Graph – Tool of the Economist: A Math Review, Production Possibility Frontiers
– Opportunity Costs and Eciency, The Market Economy – Supply and Demand Consumer
and Producer Surplus, Elasticity of Supply and Demand, Individual Choice: The Theory Behind
Demand, Theory of the Firm: Supply Production, and Costs, Perfect Competition, Monopoly,
Monopolistic Competition, Oligopoly, and Strategic Pricing, Wage and Interest Determination,
The Government in the Economy
Semester Two
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Principles of Accounting HMS125 Longitudinal/2 (2,2,0)3
Course Orientation: Overview of classroom policies and expectation, Introduction to Accounting and Business, Analysing Transactions, The Adjusting Process, Completing the Accounting
Cycle, Accounting for Merchandising Businesses, Nature of Merchandising Business, Financial
Statement s for a Merchandising Business, Merchandising Transactions, The Adjusting and
Closing Process, The Periodic Inventory System, Inventories, Control of Inventory, Inventory
Cost Flow Assumptions, Inventory Costing Methods,Reporting Merchandise Inventory in the
Financial Statements, Estimating Inventory Cost, Cash, Bank Reconciliation and Petty Cash.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Principles of Programming COM126 Longitudinal/2 (2,0,3)3
•	 Computer structure and Algorithms (Computer structure. Low and high languages,
Compiling, running and debugging)
•	 The components of JAVA language (Types in JAVA, variables, assignment and
conditional statements)
•	 Loop statements (The FOR statement, the WHILE statement, the DO-WHILE statement
and casting)
•	 Arrays (Arrays declaration , multidimensional arrays, Class String and string methods.)
•	 Methods in Java (Principles of procedural programming. Top-down design of a
program, modulation, passing parameters to method, static methods)
•	 Sorting and searching algorithms (Selection sort, insertion sort, bubble sort,Searching
methods )
•	 Recursion 1 (Recurrence as an alternative to iteration. Dierent kinds of recursion)
•	 Recursion 2 (Recursion and arrays Towers of Hanoi problem)
•	 Principles of object-oriented programming(OOP) (Class denition: attributes and
methods, Constructors (copy, default), Setter and Getter methods, references to object,
encapsulation)
Computer Science Departmenta
22 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
•	 Inheritance (Creating subclasses, overriding methods, class hierarchies)
•	 Collections, composite objects, self referential objects (Dynamic data structures:stack,
linked lists, two way linked list)
•	 Advanced Input /Output: Streams and Files (Basic le manipulations in JAVA)
•	 Review (Review on the whole material following above)
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Linear Algebra and Geometry MAT127 Longitudinal/2 (2,2,0)3
This course cover: Linear equations and matrices,Vector spaces, Linear transformations.Inner
products, orthogonalisation and projections, QR factorisations, reactions.Determinants. Eigen values and eigenvectors. Orthogonal transformations. Symmetric matrices and quadratic
forms, canonical forms for conics and quadrics, principal axes, diagonalisation of a quadratic
form by completing the square and Sylvester’s Law of Inertia. The Cayley-Hamilton Theorem.
Jordan forms. Functions of matrices, Systems of ordinary dierential equations.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Calculus-2 MAT128 Longitudinal/2 (2,2,0)3
This introductory calculus course covers integration of functions of one variable, with applications. Topics include:
•	 Concepts of Integration,
•	 Denite and Indenite Integration
•	 The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus
•	 Applications to Geometry: Area, Volume, and Arc Length
•	 Applications to Science: Average Values, Work, and Probability
•	 Techniques of Integration
•	 Approximation of Denite Integrals, Improper Integrals, and L’Hôspital’s Rule
Semester Three
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Digital Systems COM211 Longitudinal/3 (2,2,0)3
This course introduces students to the basic concepts of digital systems, including analysis and
design. Both combinational and sequential logic will be covered. Students will gain experience
with several levels of digital systems, from simple logic circuits to hardware description language and interface programming in C.
The following topics will be covered:
COMPUTER SCIENCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 23
Number systems, Boolean algebra, Binary arithmetic, Logic gates, Programmable logic, Combinational logic and building blocks, Synchronous sequential circuit design, Latches, ip-ops,
registers and counters , State machines, Verilog and C programming
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Programming Methods COM212 Longitudinal/3 (2,0,3)3
•	 Review of control structure, functions, and primitive data type
•	 Arrays, Multi-dimensional arrays, More about methods, Exceptions, Recursion, Classes &
Objects, Inner classes. I/O techniques in java, File and other related classes( streams ).
Strings, String processing and data representing in memory
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Dierential Equations MAT213 Longitudinal/3 (2,2,0)3
•	 First-Order Dierential Equations
•	 Separable Equations & Applications
•	 Linear Equations & Applications
•	 Second-Order Dierential Equations
•	 Introduction
•	 General Solutions
•	 Homogeneous Equations
•	 Free Mechanical Vibrations
•	 Nonhomogeneous Equations
•	 Forced Mechanical Vibrations
•	 The Laplace Transform
•	 Laplace Transform & Its Inverse
•	 Transforms of Derivatives and IVPs
•	 Shifting Theorems
•	 Discontinuous Inputs
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Multimedia INT214 3/Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
Topics include Fundamentals of multimedia, media and data streams, sound/audio, image,
graphics, video and animation, Topics in data compression including coding requirements,
source, entropy, and hybrid coding, JPEG, H.261, MPEG, MP3 and etc, Computer technology
issues such as communication architecture, multimedia workstations, cache systems, storage
systems and optical storage, Multimedia operating system issues such as real-time operation,
Computer Science Departmenta
24 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
resource management, process management, le systems, and Multimedia networking, Multimedia synchronization, presentation requirements, reference model, and synchronization
techniques, Multimedia database issues such as data organization, indexing and retrieval,
Multimedia applications including digital libraries, system software, toolkits, conferencing
paradigms, structured interaction support, and examples from video/audio/graphics conferencing, Latest Web technologies.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Database Concepts COM215 Longitudinal/3 (2,0,3)3
This course covers database design and the use of databases in applications, with a short introduction to the internals of relational database engines. It includes extensive coverage of
the relational model, relational algebra, and SQL. The course also features database design
and relational design principles based on dependencies and normal forms. Many additional
key database topics from the design and application-building perspective are also covered,
including indexes, views, transactions, and integrity constraints. Systems such as MapReduce
framework and key-value stores will also be covered. There will be a programming project,
which explores database design and management in web applications by utilizing appropriate features of SQL.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Statistics and Probabilities MAT216 3/Longitudinal 3(2,2,0)
Exploring Univariate Data:
•	 Types of data, Mean and Median
•	 Standard Deviation and Variance, Range, IQR and Finding Outliers
•	 Graphs and Describing Di猀琀ributions
Introduction to Probability:
•	 Counting Techniques, Combinations and Permutations
•	 Sets and Venn Diagrams
•	 Basic Probability Models
•	 General Probability Rules
Discrete Distributions :
•	 Random Variables
•	 Binomial Di猀琀ributions
•	 Geometric Di猀琀ributions
Continuous Distributions :
COMPUTER SCIENCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 25
•	 Density Curves, The Normal Di猀琀ribution
•	 Standard Normal Calculations
•	 Sampling Di猀琀ribution of x and ˆp
Bivariate Data :
•	 Scatter Plots, Correlation
•	 The Lea猀琀 Squares Regression Line, Residuals
•	 Non-Linear Models
•	 Relations in Categorical Data
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
System Analysis and Design-1 SYS217 Longitudinal/3 (2,2,0)3
This module introduces the students to the concepts and skills of system analysis and design. It
includes expanded coverage of data ow diagrams, data dictionary, and process specications.
•	 System Analysis Fundamentals
•	 Information requirements analysis
•	 The analysis process
•	 The essentials of design
•	 Software engineering and implementation
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Numeric Computation -1 MAT218 Longitudinal/3 (2,2,0)3
Introduction
Motivation and applications.
Computation and Error Analysis
Accuracy and precision; Truncation and round-o errors; Binary Number System;Error propagation.
Linear Systems and Equations
Matrix representation; Cramer’s rule;
Gauss Elimination; Matrix Inversion; LU
Decomposition; Iterative Methods;
Relaxation Methods; Eigen Values.
Algebraic Equations
Bracketing methods: Bisection, ReguliFalsi; Open methods: Secant, Fixed point
Computer Science Departmenta
26 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
iteration, Newton-Raphson; Multivariate
Newton’s method.
Regression and Curve Fitting
Linear regression; Least squares; Total
Least Squares; Interpolation; Newton’s
Dierence Formulae; Cubic Splines
Semester Four
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Computer Architecture COM221 4/Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
Introduction, Hi猀琀ory
Logical circuits
•	 Boolean algebra;Combinational circuits;Fundamental and additional logical gates;
Karnaugh maps;Decoders;Multiplexors;Adders; Number representation; ALU;
Latches; Sequential analysis;Regi猀琀ers;
Processors
•	 Regi猀琀ers sets; ISA;Control unit; Modern architectures.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Human-Computer Interaction INT222 Longitudinal/4 (2,0,3)3
•	 What is Interaction Design?
•	 Understanding and conceptualising interaction
•	 Understanding users
•	 The process of Interaction Design
•	 Establishing requirements
•	 Prototyping
•	 Evaluation
•	 Observing users
•	 Emerging Trends
•	 Student Group Presentations
•	
COMPUTER SCIENCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 27
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
System Analysis and Design-2 SYS223 Longitudinal/4 (2,2,0)3
Fundamental knowledge, methods and skills needed to analyze and design computer-based
systems, the role of the systems analyst, the techniques employed and relationships that need
to be maintained, utilization of the structured software development life cycle approach, process modeling, information modeling, system architecture modeling, Object-Oriented modeling using UML. A project is given that covers analysis and design phases of a relatively data-oriented business case with emphasis on data modeling (ER diagrams), process modeling (DFDs),
and architectural system design issues (DD, HIPO, IPO.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Database Programming COM224 Longitudinal/4 (2,0,3)3
Data/Information & Processing; File based systems; Data Processing Modes; Types of Databases; Components of DBMS; History and objectives of the development of DBMS; Types of data
models; Roles in the database environment; Database Architecture; Relational Algebra & Relational Calculus; Terminology of Relational Model; Associations/Relationships; Types of Keys;
Data Integrity; Views; Indexes; Design & Administration; Database system development life
cycle; Phases and types of database design; Data Administration & Database Administration;
ER-Modeling using UML; Normalization; Handling Problematic & Redundant data; Functional
Dependencies; Transitive Dependencies; Identifying Normal Forms; Writing SQL Commands;
Creating & Indexing the Tables; Formatting Query Results into Reports; Usage of SQL-Plus.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Data Structures and Algorithms COM225 Longitudinal/4 (2,0,3)3
Introduction to Data Structures and Algorithms, Arrays, Sorting Algorithms, Searching Algorithms, Stacks, Stacks Applications, Queues Priorities Queues, Linked List, Double Linked List,
Stacks and Queues Applications using Linked List, Introduction to Tree, Binary Tree.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Numeric Computation -2 MAT226 4/Longitudinal 3(2,2,0)
Introduction
Numerical Dierentiation
Numerical dierentiation; higher order formulae.
Integration and Integral Equations
Trapezoidal rules; Simpson’s rules; Quadrature.
Computer Science Departmenta
28 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
ODEs: Initial Value Problems
Euler’s methods; Runge-Kutta methods;
Predictor-corrector methods; Adaptive step size; Sti ODEs.
ODEs: Boundary Value Problems
Shooting method; Finite dierences;
Over/Under Relaxation (SOR).
PDEs
Introduction to Partial Dierential Equations.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Operations Research MAT227 Longitudinal/4 (2,2,0)3
•	 Introduction to Operations Research (OR)
•	 Introduction to Foundation mathematics and statistics
•	 Linear Programming (LP), LP and allocation of resources, LP denition, Linearity
requirement
•	 Maximization Then Minimization problems.
•	 Graphical LP Minimization solution, Introduction, Simplex method denition, formulating
the Simplex model.
•	 Linear Programming – Simplex Method for Maximizing.
•	 Simplex maximizing example for similar limitations, Mixed limitations
•	 Example containing mixed constraints, Minimization example for similar limitations.
•	 Sensitivity Analysis: Changes in Objective Function, Changes in RHS, The Transportation
Model
•	 Basic Assumptions.
•	 Solution Methods:
 Feasible Solution: The Northwest Method, The Lowest Cost Method;
 Optimal Solution: The Stepping Stone Method, Modied; Distribution
 (MODI) Method.
•	 The Assignment Model:- Basic Assumptions
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Internet Technologies INT228 4/Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
Introduction to HTML5:Introduction, Editing HTML5,First HTML5 example,W3C html5 val-
COMPUTER SCIENCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 29
idation service, Heading, linking, Images, Special Characters and Horizontal rules, Lists,
Tables, Forms, Internal linking, Meta elements, New HTML5 Form input types, input and
datalist elements and autocomplete attribute, Page structure elements, Introduction
to Cascading Style Sheets: Inline styles, embedded style sheets, Positioning elements,
Backgrounds, Elements Dimensions, Box model and text ows, Media types and media queries, Drop down menus, Text Shadows, Rounded corners, Color, Box shadows, Linear
Gradients, Radial gradients, Multiple background images, Image Borders, Animation selectors,
Transitions and Transformations, Java Script: Introduction to Scripting, Control Statements,
Functions, Arrays, Objects, Javascript Event handling: Reviewing the load Event, Event mousemove and the event Object, Rollovers with mouseover and mouseout, Form Processing with
focus and blur, More Form Processing with submit and reset, Event Bubbling, More Events
Introduction to canvas : Canvas coordinate system, Rectangles, Using paths to draw lines,
Drawing arcs and circles, Shadows, Quadratic curve, Bezier curves, Linear gradients, Radial
Gradients, Images, image Manipulation, Patterns, Transformations, resizing the canvas to
ll the browser, Alpha transparency, Compositing, Save and restore methods, Note on
canvas SVG and Canvas 3D, Ajax-Enabled Rich Internet Applications with XML and JSON:
Introduction, Rich Internet Applications (RIAs) with Ajax,history of Ajax, “Raw” Ajax Example Using the XMLHttpRequest Object,using XML and the DOM, Creating a Full-Scale
Ajax-Enabled Application, Web Servers: Introduction, HTTP transactions, Multitier Application
Architecture, Client-Side Scripting versus Server-Side Scripting, Accessing Web Servers,
Apache, MySQLand PHP Installation, Microsoft IIS Express and Web Matrix, PHP: Introduction,
simple PHP program, converting between data types, arithmetic operators, initializing and
manipulating Arrays, String comparision, String Processing with Regular Expressions, Form
Processing and Business Logic, Reading from a Database, Using Cookies, Dynamic Content
Semester Five
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Object Oriented Programming COM311 Longitudinal/5 (2,0,3)3
Denition of object oriented, Inheritance, Multiple inheritance, Encapsulation, Polymorphism,
Introduction to Interfaces, Dealing with interfaces, Packages, Application cases, Graphical User
Interface GUI, GUI Application .
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Computer Networks and Commu-
 nications INT312 Longitudinal/5 (2,0,3)3
Topics covered Basic concepts of networking, Network topologies, The concept of layered architecture modeling including OSI and the TCP/IP protocol suite. Client-server communications,
Physical layer functionalities including signaling, modulation, multiplexing, line coding and synchronization. Transmission media. Network performance measures including throughput, delays
are presented, Data vs. signaling rates, channel bandwidth and capacity, Link layer functionalities
Computer Science Departmenta
30 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
including frame synchronization, error detection and control including ARQ, ow control mechanisms including sliding windows, Circuit, packet and virtual circuit switching technologies, Local area network technologies including ETHERNET, Token Rings, Multiple-access schemes such
as CSMA/CD, CSMA/CA and Token-passing. MAC addressing. Switched vs. shared ETHERNETs.
Performance evaluation, including throughputs and delays. Internetworking devices including
repeaters, bridges, switches, routers and gateways. Network layer protocols, including IP, ARP
and ICMP. IP addressing schemes. Subnetting, Internet routing including protocols used in the
Internet such as RIP, OSPF and BGP, Transport layer protocols including UDP and TCP. Ports and
sockets. TCP connection establishment. Error, ow and congestion control in TCP, Applications
layer protocols such as HTTP, FTP, DNS, SMTP, TELNET, Network security measures including encryption, authentication, data integrity and rewalls.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Database Applications SYS313 5/Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
Covers object-relational database systems and using them in programming and in web
applications. Topics include: Object-relational database systems. The relational data model.
The PL-SQL language. SQL queries. Installing and using database systems. Using graphical user
interfaces for database management. Programming database systems using database
Middleware. Programming web-based database application using middleware.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Software Engineering I SWE314 5/Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
What is software engineering? Software lifecycle and process models, Software engineering
tools and programming environments, Overview of software project management, Software
requirements specication, Software design, Using APIs, Software verication and validation,
and Software evolution. Software engineering tools for modeling such as: Visual Paradigm
UML or Rational Rose will be covered in lab extensively covering ow-oriented modeling, behavioral modeling, scenario-base modeling and class modeling.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Visual Programming COM315 5/Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
•	 Course intro, syllabus, Intro to computing
•	 Program design and implementation
•	 Essential VB, variables, data types, commenting
•	 Arithmetic operators and expressions
•	 Decision Structures (ifs and select case)
COMPUTER SCIENCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 31
•	 Loops (while, for)
•	 Loop applications (summation, counting)
•	 Sub Procedures (val and ref parameters)
•	 Functions (val and ref parmaters)
•	 Strings
•	 Arrays
•	 More Arrays
•	 Files
•	 Databases
•	 Course overview
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
 Algorithms Analysis and Design COM316 Longitudinal/5 (2,2,0)3
Introduction, Algorithm denition, Algorithm Analysis, Recurrence Relations, Design & Analysis of Algorithms: Divide and Conquer, Greedy Algorithm, Dynamic Programming, Lower
Bound Theory, Sorting and Searching, NP-Complete Problems: Basic Concepts.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Compliers Design COM317 5/Longitudinal 3(2,2,0)
Specic topics covered in this course include:
•	 Overview of compilation
•	 Lexical analysis
•	 Context-free grammars, top-down and bottom-up parsing, error recovery
•	 Abstract syntax trees, symbol tables
•	 Lexical scoping, types (primitive, record, arrays, references), type checking
•	 Object-oriented type systems, subtyping, interfaces, traits
•	 Three-address code and other intermediate representations
•	 Code generation, data representation, memory management, object layout
•	 Code transformation and optimization , Class hierarchy analysis
•	 Dataow analysis , Register allocation
•	 Run-time systems, just-in-time compilation, garbage collection
Computer Science Departmenta
32 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
Semester Six
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Software Engineering II SWE321 Longitudinal/6 (2,0,3)3
This course covers the software development process, from requirements elicitation and analysis, through specication and design, to implementation, integration, testing, and maintenance (evolution). A variety of concepts, principles, techniques, and tools are presented, encompassing topics such as software processes, project management, people management,
software requirements, system models, architectural and detailed design, user interface design, programming practices, verication and validation, and software evolution. Although the
emphasis will be on modern approaches some moretraditional software engineering techniques will also be discussed.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Operating Systems COM322 Longitudinal/6 (2,0,3)3
Overview: Background, Computer-system structures, Operating system structures.
Process Management: Processes and threads, Process synchronization, Deadlocks, CPU scheduling.
Storage Management: Memory management, Virtual memory, File-system interface, File-system implementation
I/O Systems: I/O, Secondary-storage structure.
 Distributed Systems: Network and distributed system structures, Distributed le systems, Distributed coordination
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Open Source software and
technologies INT 323 6/Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
•	 Open Source Software: Denitions and History – Where Open Source is
•	 Successful – Open Source: The Good, the Bad and the Ugly.
•	 Five Immediate Open Source Opportunities – Five More Open Source
•	 Opportunities.
•	 Open Source Server Applications – Open Source Desktop Applications.
•	 How Open Source Software is Developed – Managing System Implementation.
•	 Application Architecture – The Cost of Open Source Systems.
COMPUTER SCIENCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 33
•	 Exploring the Android API:Perspective and architecture overview,Design philosophy,
Anatomy of an Android Application,Application life cycle
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Computer Graphics COM325 6/Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
•	 Introduction: History of computer graphics, graphics architectures and software,
imaging: pinhole camera, human vision, synthetic camera, modeling vs rendering
•	 OpenGL: architecture, displaying simple two-dimensional geometric objects,
positioning systems, working in a windowed environment
•	 Color: Color perception, color models (RGB, CMY, HLS), color transformations. Color in
OpenGL. RGB and Indexed color.
•	 Input: working in a network environment, client-server computing; input measure,
event, sample and request input, using callbacks, icking.
•	 Geometric transformations: ane transformations (translation, rotation, scaling, shear),
homogeneous coordinates, concatenation, current transformation and matrix stacks.
•	 Three dimensional graphics: classical three dimensional viewing, specifying views,
ane transformation in 3D, projective transformations.
•	 Ray Tracing.
•	 Shading: illumination and surface modeling, Phong shading model, polygon shading.
•	 Rasterization: line drawing via Bresenham’s algorithm, clipping, polygonal ll, BitBlt.
Introduction to hidden surface removal (z buer).
•	 Discrete Techniques: buers, bitblt, reading and writing bitmaps and pixelmaps, texture
mapping,compositing.
•	 Advanced Topics.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Scienti昀椀c Research Methodologies HMS324 6/Longitudinal 3(2,2,0)
Research Techniques: Basic research and applied research, Data collection techniques, sampling techniques; Data processing; Research Methods: Subject selection, Subject restriction,
Reference collection; Denition of the problem or the subject in details, Denition of solution
techniques or analysis methods, Researching and performing practical works, Results; Reporting: Page set up, Sentence structure, Headings, Abbreviation formats, Figure and table formats,
Table of references format. Computer application using SPSS is required.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Data Mining COM326 6/Longitudinal 3(2,2,0)
34 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
Introduction to data mining (DM)
Motivation for Data Mining - Data Mining-Denition and Functionalities – Classication of DM
Systems - DM task primitives - Integration of a Data Mining system with a Database or a Data
Warehouse - Issues in DM – KDD Process .
 Data Pre-processing
Why to pre-process data? - Data cleaning: Missing Values, Noisy Data - Data Integration and
transformation - Data Reduction: Data cube aggregation, Dimensionality reduction - Data
Compression - Numerosity Reduction - Data Mining Primitives - Languages and System Architectures: Task relevant data - Kind of Knowledge to be mined - Discretization and Concept
Hierarchy.
 Concept Description and Association Rule Mining
What is concept description? - Data Generalization and summarization-based characterization - Attribute relevance - class comparisons Association Rule Mining: Market basket analysis
- basic concepts - Finding frequent item sets: Apriori algorithm - generating rules – Improved
Apriori algorithm – Incremental ARM – Associative Classication – Rule Mining
Classication and Prediction
What is classication and prediction? – Issues regarding Classication and prediction:
Classication methods: Decision tree, Bayesian Classication, Rule based, CART, Neural Network
Prediction methods: Linear and nonlinear regression, Logistic Regression
Introduction of tools such as DB Miner /WEKA/DTREG DM Tools
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
E-Commerce INT327 6/Longitudinal 3(2,2,0)
This course focuses on electronic commerce applications, technologies, and tools which are
used to conduct business on the World Wide Web. It reviews foundations of e-commerce, its
infrastructure, current business models in business-to-customers (B2C) and business-to-business (B2B) transactions, security and quality assurance, web site design strategies, payment
systems, and various issues—Internet marketing, legal, regulatory, technological, social, and
ethical--which relate to electronic business, systems development issues, electronic data interchange, web-based marketing, e-supply chains, e-procurement, emarketplace, customer relationship management, and web-enabling mobile. A major part of the course will be devoted
to hands-on practices covering client-side (front-end) and server-side (back-end) applications
in web-based business information systems. Essentials of contemporary programming tools
for e-commerce development such as HTML, XML, ASP (VB/JavaScript) ... will be explored.
E-Business case 猀琀udies are used to demon猀琀rate the advantages and the challenges related to
integrating ecommerce applications.
COMPUTER SCIENCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 35
Semester Seven
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Information security INT411 7/Longitudinal 3(2,2,0)
Topics include Foundations: security mindset, essential concepts (policy, CIA, etc), Software
security: vulnerabilities and protections, malware, program analysis, Practical cryptography:
encryption, authentication, hashing, symmetric and asymmetric crypto Networks: wired and
wireless networks, protocols, attacks and countermeasures, Applications and special topics:
databases, web apps, privacy and anonymity, voting, public policy.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Parallel and Distributed Computing COM412 7/Longitudinal 3(2,2,0)
PART I: Synchronous Parallel Models and Algorithms
•	 Overview of parallel models and analysis of parallel algorithms.
•	 Combinational Circuits, Parallel computation using circuits.
•	 The PRAM Model and several PRAM Algorithms will becdiscussed.
•	 Interconnection Network Models such as linear arrays, 2D meshes, hyper cubes.
•	 Models Using Buses including a recon
•	 gurable mesh and a linear array with optimal buses.
•	 The locally developed MSIMD model called MASC.
•	 Asynchronous Parallel Models including SPMD, BSP and LogP.
PART I I: Distributed Algorithms
•	 Introduction, locality-sensitivity, distributed network models
•	 Broadcast, convergecast, downcast, upcast
•	 Tree constructions
•	 Synchronizers
•	 Vertex coloring, maximal independent sets, message routing
•	 Locality-preserving representations
•	 Applications of locality-preserving representations
Computer Science Departmenta
36 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
IT Project Management INT413 Longitudinal/7 (2,2,0)3
Introduction to project management concepts, tools, and techniques; project integration
management; project planning, scope management, scheduling, budget control, human resource management, communication management, risk analysis and management, project
quality management, and procurement management. MS-Project will be demonstrated and
used as a tool for creating project management documents.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Arti昀椀cial Intelligence COM414 7/Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
An introduction to the basic principles, techniques, and applications of Articial Intelligence.
Coverage includes knowledge representation, logic, inference, problem solving, search algorithms, game theory, perception, learning, planning, and agent design. Students will experience
programming in AI language tools. Potential areas of further exploration include expert systems,
neural networks, fuzzy logic, robotics, natural language processing, and computer vision.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Simulation and Modeling COM415 7/Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
1. Introduction: Course Logistics, Denitions of Modelling and Simulation, When to apply
these techniques, Applications, Terminology & Components , Discrete vs. Continuous time
and Process ow in simulation study.
2. Simulation Examples: Queuing systems , Communications networks
3. General Principles: Event -driven simulation, World Views, List processing.
4. Simulation software: History,Selection process, Simulation in High Level Language (C, C++,
Pascal, Fortran), Simulation packages (Matlab/Simulink), Interpreted vs. compiled simulators, Future trends
5. Statistical models: Terminology and Concepts, Useful Statistical Models, Distributions.
6. Queuing models: Characteristics, Performance Measures, Steady-State Behavior, Networks
of Queues.
7. Random Number Generation: Properties of Random Numbers, Generation of Pseudo-Random Numbers, Testing for Randomness, Pitfalls.
Semester Eight
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
 Mobile Device Programming
technologies COM421 Longitudinal/8 (2,0,3)3
COMPUTER SCIENCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 37
•	 Introduction to Mobile Computing,
•	 Mobile Platforms & Architectures,
•	 Mobile Java – J2ME,
•	 Android Operating Sy猀琀em: It is Architecture and its Programming
Implementation using Eclipse, JDK and SDK.
•	 iOS Operating Sy猀琀em,
•	 Symbian S60 OS-Windows Phone 7,
•	 Wireless Telecommunication,
•	 Wireless Networks,
•	 Mobile Security,
•	 Mobile Databases,
•	 Mobile Multimedia Services,
•	 Emerging Mobile Technologies
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Computer Ethics HMS422 8/Longitudinal 2(2,0,0)
This course introduces students to the topics of information technology ethics including:
denitions, rules & policies of computer ethics, hacking, viruses, Internet ethics, freedom of
expression on the Internet, computer professionals and social responsibilities, software copyright, intellectual property, software piracy, cyber law and privacy & security of computerized
information.
Topics:
An Overview of Ethics, Ethics for IT Workers and IT Users, Computer and Internet Crime, Privacy, Intellectual Property, The Impact of Information Technology on Productivity and Quality of Life,
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Graduation Project COM425 8/Longitudinal 6(0,0,18)
Students will identify an actual Computer related business problem and apply research principles and procedures to reach a solution. This includes development of a proposal, problem
formulation as well as data collection and analysis culminating in a presentation of all steps
used in the research process.
An applied detailed research on a subject in a related eld should by conducted by the student as a prerequisite for graduation. Research structure and set up are supposed to strictly
follow the scientic research methods and techniques in terms of: Denition of the problem
or the subject in details, Denition of solution techniques or analysis methods, Researching
and performing practical works, Results; Reporting: Page set up, Sentence structure, Headings,
Abbreviation formats, Figure and table formats, Table of references format.
COMPUTER SCIENCE DEPARTMENTA
ELECTIVE COURSES
Elective courses determine by the Faculty Management according to the strategic plan.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Open Source Operating Systems COM4xx Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
The course covers Partitioning of hard-drives , Slackware OS Setup, Basic Linux Commands, Network Connectivity, Dual booting w/other O.S., Adding packages sets, Adding partitions, Adding
more swap space, Opening User Accounts, Setting up Groups, Setting Permissions on Files &
Directories, Groups and Permissions Exercise{graded}, Setting up Telnet Server, Using SSH, Setting up a PROFTPD server, Setting up a VSFTPD server, Conguring TCP forwarding, Starting the
Apache Web Server, Default server web site, User’s web sites, Executing CGI scripts, Virtual Hosting,
Protecting directories with hatches, Installing Apache from Scratch, Conguring an SSL Server.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Knowledge Management COM4xx Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
The course covers Principles of Knowledge Management (Overview, Knowledge Management
Solutions, etc.), Knowledge Management Technologies (Articial Intelligence, Digital Libraries,
Repositories, etc.), Knowledge Management Systems (Knowledge Discovery Systems, Knowledge Capture Systems, Knowledge Sharing Systems, Knowledge Application Systems, etc.)
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Genetic Algorithms COM4xx Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
Basic concepts: representation, objective & evaluation functions, local vs global optima Traditional methods: hill climbing, simulated annealing, branch and bound Evolutionary approaches: Population-based Search: genetic algorithms and evolutionary computation, genetic
programming, niching , crowding methods, island models, and co-evolution.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Expert Systems COM4xx Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
Introduction to Expert Systems, Knowledge Acquisition, Knowledge Representation, Expert System Tools, LISP, CLIPS, Expert System Implementation, Expert System Testing
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Computer Network Programming COM4xx Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
Networking basics, protocol basics, Internet protocols, and socket programming. This is a project-oriented course. Students will be required to design and implement a layered protocol stack.
COMPUTER SCIENCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 39
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Decision Support Systems COM4xx Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
Introduction to DSS, Expectations and DSS, Decision Making, Exploring the Range of DSS research, Knowledge Management, Project Proposals, Model Oriented DSS, Visualization-oriented DSS, Business intelligence and data warehousing, DSS user interfaces, New trends in DSS.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Advanced Computer Network
management COM4xx Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
The course covers Switching : Switch performance measures, Time and space switches, Modular switch design Packet switch and distributed Buer, Optical N/W : DWDM., High -speed Networks, IP forwarding Architectures, Overlay Model-CLIP, LANE, RSVP, Virtual Private Networks
(VPN), MPLS support for VPN ,Network Management ,Case study : HP-Open View, Inter-vehicular communications andGPS, Network Monitoring and Tuning, Troubleshooting.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Advanced Databases COM4xx Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
Introduction, Concepts and Denitions, Normalization Techniques , Data Mining and Data
warehouse, Transaction Processing ,Concurrency Control, Distributed Databases, Database
Security, Temporal database.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Modern Trends in Computer
Science COM4xx Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
The course topics will be tailored according to the emphasis of the course selected.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Advanced Algorithms COM4xx Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
combinatorial algorithms (set cover, steiner tree and TSP, multiway cut, knapsack, minimum
makespan scheduling), LP-Based algorithms (LP Duality, set cover via dual tting, LP rounding
techniques, sparsest cut, facility location, semidenite programming and max-cut) and other
topics including approximation algorithms based on algorithmic game theory, hardness of
approximation and open problems.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Cryptography COM4xx Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
Basic Security Concepts ,Basic Cryptography, Hash functions, Secret Key Cryptography , Public
Key, Cryptography , Authentication ,Trusted Intermediaries ,Real-time Communication Security, Miscellaneous .
COMPUTER SCIENCE DEPARTMENTA
40 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
First Year - Semester One
# Course Title Code Credit Hours
1 Computer Applications COM-111 3
2 Principles of Information Systems INF-112 3
3 English for Speci昀椀c Purpose I ENG-113 3
4 Calculus I MAT114 3
5 Introduction to Information Technology INT 115 3
6 Discrete Mathematics MAT116 3
7 Principles of Economic HMS117 3
8 Principles of Management HMS118 3
24
First Year - Semester Two
# Course Title Code Credit Hours
1 Computer Maintenance INF-121 2
2 Computer Implementation in Business INF-122 3
3 Calculus II MAT124 3
4 English for Speci昀椀c Purpose II ENG-123 3
5 Principles of Accounting HMS125 3
6 Principles of Programming COM126 3
7 Computer Equipment and Environments COM127 3
8 Linear Algebra and Geometry MAT128 3
23
Second Year - Semester Three :
# Course Title Code Credit Hours
1 Digital Systems COM211 3
2 Programming Methods COM212 3
3 System analysis and design SYS213 3
4 Multimedia Systems INT214 3
5 Database Concepts COM215 3
6 Statistics & Probability MAT216 3
7 Management information systems SYS217 3
8 Differential Equations MAT218 3
24
Second Year - Semester Four :
COMPUTER SCIENCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 41
# Course Title Code Credit Hours
1 Communication Skills HMS221 3
2 Human - Computer Interaction INT222 3
3 Economic and Forecasting Models HMS223 3
4 Database Programming COM224 3
5 Algorithms and Data Structure COM225 3
6 Applied Statistic MAT226 3
7 Operational Research MAT227 3
21
Third Year - Semester Five
# Course Title Code Credit Hours
1 Database Applications SYS311 3
2 Computer Networks and Communications INT312 3
3 Software Project Management INT313 3
4 Software Engineering (1) SWE 314 3
5 Visual Programming COM315 3
6 Decision support and Expert Systems SYS316 3
7 Internet Technology (1) INT317 3
21
Third Year - Semester Six :
# Course Title Code Credit Hours
1 Software Engineering (2) SWE321 3
2 Operating Systems Concepts COM322 3
3 Network Security INT323 3
4 Research Methodology HMS324 3
5 Internet Technology (2) INT325 3
6 Data Mining INT326 3
7 E-commerce INT327 3
21
Fourth Year - Semester Seven :
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEPARTMENT
42 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
# Course Title Code Credit Hours
1 Information Security INT411 3
2 Web Systems and Applications INT412 3
3 Open Source Software & Technologies INT413 3
4 Simulation and Modeling COM414 3
5 Elective (1) INT415 3
6 Elective (2) INT416 3
18
Fourth Year - Semester Eight
# Course Title Code Credit Hours
1 Cloud Computing INT421 3
2 Mobile Device Programming Technologies INT422 3
3 Professional Ethics HMS423 2
4 Elective (3) INT424 3
5 Elective (4) INT425 3
6 Graduation Project INT426 6
20
Course Outline
Detailed behavioral objectives, skills, assignments and problems are listed in each course
book. The lists are too extensive to be included below Courses in the curriculum timetable
not outlined below are included in other programmed, or in the original document with the
program coordinator.
Semester One
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Introduction to Information
Technology INT115 1/ Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
The course provides students with a broad foundation in computer science. Topics include:
introduction to digital technology, historical review; logic gates; binary, octal, and hexadecimal systems; computer architecture and basic components, internal and external interfaces,
types of removable media; introduction to operating systems; programming paradigms, basic
COMPUTER SCIENCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 43
programming concepts; concept of algorithm, representation, correctness and performance
of algorithms; introduction to objects. The course equips students with basic problem solving
skills and prepares them for taking the programming sequence subjects and other computer
science disciplines.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Principles of Management HMS118 1/ Longitudinal 3(3,0,0)
I. Introduction
Denition of management, The role of managers, The evolution of management
The origins of management, Scientic management, Human relations management, Operations, information, systems, and contingency management
II. Organizational Environments and Cultures
External environments, Internal environments, Ethics and social responsibility
III. Management Functions
A. Planning
(Strategic planning, Tactical planning, Operational planning)
B. Organizing
(Corporate- level strategies, Industry -level strategies,Firm - level strategies, Managing human resource systems)
C. Leading
(Motivation, Leadership styles, Managing communications)
D. Controlling
(The control process, Control methods, Managing information, Managing service and manufacturing operations).
Semester Two
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Computer equipment and environment COM127 1/ Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
Topic include: workplace health and safety procedures, computer work environment, manual
handling techniques for ICT equipment, demonstrate safe use of a PC, pack/unpack and t
static sensitive devices, duties of employers and employees, legal requirement for the use and
disposal of hazardous substances, health and safety responsibilities of employees, safety factors to be considered while using a PC, diagnosis failures of ICT equipment, Apply preventative
maintenance to ICT systems
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEPARTMENT
44 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
Semester Three
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Management Information
Systems SYS213 3/ Longitudinal 3(3,0,0)
Topics include concept of Information Systems: Elements of Information Systems, Classications of Information Systems; Information Systems in Business Management: End User Information Systems, Oce Automation Systems, Electronic Communication Systems, Teleconference Systems, Electronic Printing Systems, Process of Image Systems; Business Information
Systems: Marketing Information System, Production Information System, Human Resource
Information System, Accounting Information System, Financial Information System; Decision
Support Systems: Models of Decision Support Systems, Executive Information System, Arti-
cial Intelligence and Expert Systems; Global Dimensions: Global Data, Security and Ethic Problems in Information Systems, Computer Crime.
Semester Four
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Communication Skills HMS221 4/Longitudinal 3(2,2,0)
Communication paradigms, perceptual processes, personal and professional relationships,
description of communication, components of communication process, functions and types
of communication, introduction to empathic communication, dierence between empty and
sympathy, Process of empathic communication, components, skill of listening, improved of
emphatic skill, importance of listening and understanding, organizational communication
and communication process in organizations, types of communication in organizations, verbal
communication, non-verbal communication, Written communication, preparation of CV. The
course also includes materials related to verbal and non-verbal communication, communication technology, and the role communication plays in culture..
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Applied Statistics MAT226 4/Longitudinal 3(2,2,0)
1. Describing data
2. Simple regressions analyses, and how to interpret the results
3. Discrete random variables and probability distribution.
 (a) Expected values
 (b) Variance, covariance
 (c) Some common discrete distributions (binomial distribution, etc)
4. Continuous random variables and probability distributions.
 (a) Expected values
 (b) Variance, covariance
COMPUTER SCIENCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 45
 (c) Normal distribution.
5. Hypothesis testing
Semester Five
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Software Project Management INT313 5/Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
Pre-requist Courses:
Introduction to project management concepts, tools, and techniques; project integration
management; project planning, scope management, scheduling, budget control, human resource management, communication management, risk analysis and management, project
quality management, and procurement management. MS-Project will be demonstrated and
used as a tool for creating project management documents.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
 Internet Technology-1 INT317 5/Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
•	 Introduction to HTML Internet
•	 HTML color and links ,Hardware and Software ,HTML Tables
•	 Essentials of Telecommunication HTML Tables
•	 Web Software HTML Frames
•	 Establishing a Web Site Photos and Forms
•	 XML ,Internet Search Tools/CSS
•	 Cascading Style Sheet Web Structure
•	 Cascading Style Sheet Web Page Design
•	 Cascading Style Sheet Web Page Design
•	 Cascading Style Sheet Security
•	 Present Project
Semester Six
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Network Security INT323 6/Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
 Basic Security Concepts
•	 Condentiality, integrity, availability
•	 Security policies, security mechanisms, assurance
 Basic Cryptography
•	 Historical background
•	 Transposition/Substitution, Caesar Cipher
•	 Introduction to Symmetric crypto primitives, Asymmetric crypto primitives, and
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEPARTMENT
46 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
•	 Hash functions
 Secret Key Cryptography
•	 Data Encryption Standard (DES), Advanced Encryption Standard (AES)
•	 Encrypting large messages (ECB, CBC, OFB, CFB, CTR), Multiple Encryption DES (EDE)
 Public Key Cryptography
•	 Number theory: Euclidean algorithm, Euler Theorem, Fermat Theorem, Totent,
functions, multiplicative and additive inverse
•	 RSA, Selection of public and private keys
 Authentication
•	 Basic concepts of identication and authentication, Password authentication, Authentication
protocols
 Trusted Intermediaries
Public Key infrastructures, Certication authorities and key distribution centers, Kerberos
 Real-time Communication Security
•	 IPsec: AH and ESP , IPsec: IKE , SSL/TLS
•	 Firewall , Auditing and intrusion detection
(Miscellaneous topics (1 lecture
•	 Assurance and Evaluation of Secure Information Systems
•	 Database Security (Security requirements in databases, Access control and authorization
in databases, Inference control)
•	 Malicious software
•	 Administrating Security (Risk Analysis, Security Planning, Organizational Security Policies)
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
 Decision Support Systems SYS324 Longitudinal/6 (2,2,0)3
The course covers Introduction to DSS, Expectations and DSS, Decision Making, Exploring the
Range of DSS research, Knowledge Management, Project Proposals, Model Oriented DSS, Visualization-oriented DSS, Business intelligence and data warehousing, DSS user interfaces, New
trends in DSS.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Internet Technologies-2 INT325 Longitudinal/6 (2,0,3)3
Introduction to HTML5:Introduction, Editing HTML5,First HTML5 example,W3C html5 validation service, Heading, linking, Images, Special Characters and Horizontal rules, Lists,
Tables, Forms, Internal linking, Meta elements, New HTML5 Form input types, input and
datalist elements and autocomplete attribute, Page structure elements, Introduction
to Cascading Style Sheets: Inline styles, embedded style sheets, Positioning elements,
Backgrounds, Elements Dimensions, Box model and text ows, Media types and media que-
COMPUTER SCIENCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 47
ries, Drop down menus, Text Shadows, Rounded corners, Color, Box shadows, Linear
Gradients, Radial gradients, Multiple background images, Image Borders, Animation selectors,
Transitions and Transformations, Java Script: Introduction to Scripting, Control Statements,
Functions, Arrays, Objects, Javascript Event handling: Reviewing the load Event, Event mousemove and the event Object, Rollovers with mouseover and mouseout, Form Processing with
focus and blur, More Form Processing with submit and reset, Event Bubbling, More Events
Introduction to canvas : Canvas coordinate system, Rectangles, Using paths to draw lines,
Drawing arcs and circles, Shadows, Quadratic curve, Bezier curves, Linear gradients, Radial
Gradients, Images, image Manipulation, Patterns, Transformations, resizing the canvas to
ll the browser, Alpha transparency, Compositing, Save and restore methods, Note on
canvas SVG and Canvas 3D, Ajax-Enabled Rich Internet Applications with XML and JSON:
Introduction, Rich Internet Applications (RIAs) with Ajax,history of Ajax, “Raw” Ajax Example Using the XMLHttpRequest Object,using XML and the DOM, Creating a Full-Scale
Ajax-Enabled Application, Web Servers: Introduction, HTTP transactions, Multitier Application
Architecture, Client-Side Scripting versus Server-Side Scripting, Accessing Web Servers,
Apache, MySQLand PHP Installation, Microsoft IIS Express and Web Matrix, PHP: Introduction,
simple PHP program, converting between data types, arithmetic operators, initializing and
manipulating Arrays, String comparision, String Processing with Regular Expressions, Form
Processing and Business Logic, Reading from a Database, Using Cookies, Dynamic Content
Semester Seven
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Web Systems and Applications INT 412 7/Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
Part I Basics
Internet and Web Protocols ,Client-Server Architecture ,Web Software
Part II Development Technologies
 Active Server Pages,VBscript
 Databases,Interfacing with Databases, Web Application Components
Authentication, User Registration
Searching, Uploading content, Emailing
Part III Design Principles
Web Application Design
Performance and Reliability
Web Application Infrastructure
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Open Source software and
technologies INT 413 7/Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEPARTMENT
48 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
•	 Open Source Software: Denitions and History – Where Open Source is
•	 Successful – Open Source: The Good, the Bad and the Ugly.
•	 Five Immediate Open Source Opportunities – Five More Open Source Opportunities.
•	 Open Source Server Applications – Open Source Desktop Applications.
•	 How Open Source Software is Developed – Managing System Implementation.
•	 Application Architecture – The Cost of Open Source Systems.
•	 Exploring the Android API: Perspective and architecture overview, Design philosophy,
Anatomy of an Android Application, Application life cycle
Semester Eight
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Professional Ethics HMS422 8/Longitudinal 2(2,0,0)
This course introduces students to the topics of information technology ethics including: denitions, rules & policies of computer ethics, hacking, viruses, Internet ethics, freedom of expression
on the Internet, computer professionals and social responsibilities, software copyright, intellectual property, software piracy, cyber law and privacy & security of computerized information.
Topics:
An Overview of Ethics, Ethics for IT Workers and IT Users, Computer and Internet Crime, Privacy, Intellectual Property, The Impact of Information Technology on Productivity and Quality of Life,
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Cloud Computing INT423 8/ Longitudinal 3(2,2,0)
Cloud Computing Basics-Overview, Applications, Intranets and the Cloud. Your Organization
and Cloud Computing- Benets, Limitations, Security Concerns. Hardware and Infrastructure- Clients, Security, Network, Services. Software as a Service (Saas)-
Understanding the Multitenant Nature of SaaS Solutions, Understanding SOA. Platform as a
Service (PaaS)-IT Evolution Leading to the Cloud, Benets of Paas Solutions, Disadvantages of
Paas Solutions. Infrastructure as a Service (Iaas)-Understanding IaaS, Improving Performance
through Load Balancing, System and Storage Redundancy, Utilizing Cloud-Based NAS Devices,
Advantages, Server Types. Identity as a Service (IDaaS)- Understanding Single Sign-On
(SSO), OpenID, Mobile ID Management. Cloud Storage-Overview, Cloud Storage Providers.
Virtualization-Understanding Virtualization, History, Leveraging Blade Servers, Server
Virtualization, Data Storage Virtualization. Securing the Cloud- General Security Advantages
of Cloud-Based Solutions, Introducing Business Continuity and Disaster Recovery. Disaster
Recovery- Understanding the Threats. Service Oriented Architecture-Understanding SOA,
Web Services Are Not Web Pages, Understanding Web Service Performance, Reuse and In-
COMPUTER SCIENCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 49
teroperability. Developing Applications-Google, Microsoft, Cast Iron Cloud, Bungee Connect,
Development. Migrating to the Cloud-Cloud Services for Individuals, Cloud Services Aimed at
the Mid-Market, Enterprise-Class Cloud Oerings, and Migration. Designing Cloud Based Solutions-System Requirements, Design Is a Give-and-Take Process. Coding Cloud Based Applications-Creating a Simple Yahoo Pipe, Using Google App Engine and creating a Windows Azure
Application. Application Scalability-Load-Balancing Process, Designing for Scalability, Capacity Planning Versus Scalability, Scalability and Diminishing Returns and Performance Tuning.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Graduation Project COM426 Longitudinal/8 (0,0,18)6
Students will identify an actual Information technology related business problem and apply
research principles and procedures to reach a solution. This includes development of a proposal, problem formulation as well as data collection and analysis culminating in a presentation of
all steps used in the research process.
An applied detailed research on a subject in a related eld should by conducted by the student as a prerequisite for graduation. Research structure and set up are supposed to strictly
follow the scientic research methods and techniques in terms of: Denition of the problem
or the subject in details, Denition of solution techniques or analysis methods, Researching
and performing practical works, Results; Reporting: Page set up, Sentence structure, Headings,
Abbreviation formats, Figure and table formats.
ELECTIVE COURSES
Elective courses determine by the Faculty Management according to the strategic plan.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Knowledge Management INT4xx Longitudinal 3(2,0,3)
The course covers Principles of Knowledge Management (Overview, Knowledge Management
Solutions, etc.), Knowledge Management Technologies (Articial Intelligence, Digital Libraries,
Repositories, etc.), Knowledge Management Systems (Knowledge Discovery Systems, Knowledge Capture Systems, Knowledge Sharing Systems, Knowledge Application Systems, etc.)
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
Expert Systems INT4xx Longitudinal (2,0,3)3
Introduction to Expert Systems, Knowledge Acquisition, Knowledge Representation, Expert System Tools, LISP, CLIPS, Expert System Implementation, Expert System Testing .
Networking basics, protocol basics, Internet protocols, and socket programming. This is a projINFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEPARTMENT
50 UNDERGRADUATE & GRADUATE PROSPECTUS National University - Sudan
ect-oriented course. Students will be required to design and implement a layered protocol stack.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
 Modern Trends in Information
Technology INT4xx Longitudinal (2,0,3)3
The contents of this course are depending on what topics will be selected. The topics are selected according to the current and updated computer technologies that can help the student
in developing his nal project.
Methods of instruction: this course base on seminars and practical work, students develop
new project regarding this new technology, discuss the new topics, and present their projects
in seminars.
Title Code Semester/Duration Credits
E-Commerce Advanced Technologies INT4xx Longitudinal (2,0,3)3
•	 Welcome to the course and introduction. B2B issues.
•	 Enterprise Resource Planning 1,2
•	 Interorganizational Communication: Supply Chain & Collaborative Commerce
•	 interorganizational Communication: Marketing & eCRM
•	 Next 猀琀eps E-government: G2B, G2G and G2C
•	 M-Commerce in enterprises, M-Commerce developments.
•	 Strategies: multiplatform issues for e-commerce
•	 Strategies: organisational resourcing
•	 Implementing e-commerce in the enterprise
•	 E-commerce Futures.
COMPUTER SCIENCE & INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 51